[release] [statefun] Announcement post and downloads for Stateful Functions v2.2.0 (#379)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2020-09-28-release-statefun-2.2.0.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Stateful Functions 2.2.0 Release Announcement"
date: 2020-09-28T08:00:00.000Z
categories: news
authors:
- tzulitai:
  name: "Tzu-Li (Gordon) Tai"
  twitter: "tzulitai"

- igalshilman:
  name: "Igal Shilman"
  twitter: "IgalShilman"
---

The Apache Flink community is happy to announce the release of Stateful Functions (StateFun) 2.2.0! This release
introduces major features that extend the SDKs, such as support for asynchronous functions in the Python SDK, new
persisted state constructs, and a new SDK that allows embedding StateFun functions within a Flink DataStream job.

> Moreover, we've also included important changes that improve out-of-box stability for modern workloads,

Reviewer: What does "modern" mean here? This could use something a bit more descriptive.

Reviewer: Lower in the text you use "common workloads", sounds better to me!

> Moreover, we've also included important changes that improve out-of-box stability for modern workloads,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, we've also included important changes that improve out-of-box stability for common workloads,
```

> Moreover, we've also included important changes that improve out-of-box stability for modern workloads,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, we've also included important changes that improve out-of-the-box stability for common workloads,
```

as well as increased observability for operational purposes.

We've also seen new 3rd party SDKs for StateFun being developed since the last release. While they are not part of the
release artifacts, it's great seeing these community-driven additions! We've highlighted these efforts below
in this announcement.

The binary distribution and source artifacts are now available on the updated [Downloads](https://flink.apache.org/downloads.html)
page of the Flink website, and the most recent Python SDK distribution is available on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/apache-flink-statefun/).
For more details, check the complete [release changelog](https://issues.apache.org/jira/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?projectId=12315522&version=12348350)
and the [updated documentation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-statefun-docs-release-2.2/).
We encourage you to download the release and share your feedback with the community through the [Flink mailing lists](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#mailing-lists)
or [JIRA](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/)!
{% toc %}

## New Features

### Asynchronous functions in Python SDK

> This release enables registering asynchronous Python functions as stateful functions, by introducing a new handler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release enables registering asynchronous Python functions as stateful functions by introducing a new handler
```

in the [Python SDK](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-statefun-docs-release-2.2/sdk/python.html): ``AsyncRequestReplyHandler``.

> This allows serving StateFun functions with modern Python web frameworks that support asynchronous IO natively (for example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows serving StateFun functions with Python web frameworks that support asynchronous IO natively (for example,
```

provided by Stateful Functions, as demonstrated below:

```java
StreamExecutionEnvironment env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

DataStream<RoutableMessage> namesIngress = ...

StatefulFunctionEgressStreams egresses =
    StatefulFunctionDataStreamBuilder.builder("example")
        .withDataStreamAsIngress(namesIngress)
        .withRequestReplyRemoteFunction(
            RequestReplyFunctionBuilder.requestReplyFunctionBuilder(
                    REMOTE_GREET, URI.create("http://..."))
                .withPersistedState("seen_count")
        .withFunctionProvider(GREET, unused -> new MyFunction())
        .withEgressId(GREETINGS)
        .build(env);

DataStream<String> responsesEgress = getDataStreamForEgressId(GREETINGS);
```

Events from ``DataStream`` ingresses are being routed to bound functions, and events sent to
egresses are captured as ``DataStream`` egresses. This opens up the possibility of building complex streaming
applications.

### Construct for Dynamic State Registration

Prior to this release, the persisted state constructs in the Java SDK, such as ``PersistedValue``, ``PersistedTable`` etc.,

> must be eagerly defined in a stateful function's class. In certain scenarios, what state a function requires is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
had to be eagerly defined in a stateful function's class. In certain scenarios, what state a function requires is not
```

> must be eagerly defined in a stateful function's class. In certain scenarios, what state a function requires is not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
had to be eagerly defined in a stateful function's class. In certain scenarios, what state a function requires is not
```

known in advance, and may only be dynamically registered at runtime (e.g., when a function is invoked).

This release enables that by providing a new ``PersistedStateRegistry`` construct:

```java
public class MyFunction implements StatefulFunction {
    @Persisted
    private final PersistedStateRegistry registry = new PersistedStateRegistry();
    private final PersistedValue<String> myValue;

    public void invoke(Context context, Object input) {
        if (myValue == null) {
            myValue = registry.registerValue(PersistedValue.of("my-value", String.class));
        }
        ...
    }
}
```

## Improvements

### Remote Functions Communication Stability

After observing common workloads, a few configurations for communicating with remote functions were adjusted for a better

> out-of-box connection stability. This includes the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
out-of-the-box connection stability. This includes the following:
```

> * The underlying connection pool was tuned for a low latency, high throughput workloads. This allows StateFun to reuse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The underlying connection pool was tuned for low latency, high throughput workloads. This allows StateFun to reuse
```

>   existing connections much more aggressively, to avoid re-establishing a connection for each request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  existing connections much more aggressively, and avoid re-establishing a connection for each request.
```

> * StateFun applies backpressure once the total number of uncompleted requests reaches a per JVM threshold, (``statefun.async.max-per-task``)
>   but observing typical workloads we have discovered that the default value is set to high. In this release the default
>   was reduced to improve stability and resource consumption, in the face of a slow-responding remote function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* StateFun applies backpressure once the total number of uncompleted requests reaches a per JVM threshold (``statefun.async.max-per-task``),
  but observing typical workloads we have discovered that the default value is set too high. In this release the default
  was reduced to improve stability and resource consumption in the face of a slow-responding remote function.
```

### Operational observability of a StateFun Application

One major goal of this release was to take a necessary step towards supporting auto-scaling of remote functions. Towards that end,
we've exposed several metrics related to workload of remote functions and resulting backpressure applied by the function
dispatchers. This includes the following:

* Per function type invocation duration / latency histograms
* Per function type backlog size
* Per JVM (StateFun worker) and per function type number of in-flight invocations

The full list of metrics and their descriptions can be found [here](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-statefun-docs-release-2.2/deployment-and-operations/metrics.html).

### Fine-grained control over remote connection lifecycle

> With this release it is possible to set individual timeouts for overall duration and individual read and write IO operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, it's possible to set individual timeouts for overall duration and individual read and write IO operations
```

of HTTP requests with remote functions. You can find the corresponding field names in a function spec that defines
these timeout values [here](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-statefun-docs-release-2.2/sdk/index.html#defining-functions).

## 3rd Party SDKs

Since the last release, we've seen new 3rd party SDKs for different languages being implemented on top of StateFun's

> remote function HTTP request-reply protocol, including a [Go]() and [Rust]() implementation. While these SDKs are not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remote function HTTP request-reply protocol, including a [Go](https://github.com/sjwiesman/statefun-go/) and [Rust](https://github.com/aljoscha/statefun-rust) implementation. While these SDKs are not
```

> remote function HTTP request-reply protocol, including a [Go]() and [Rust]() implementation. While these SDKs are not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remote function HTTP request-reply protocol, including [Go]() and [Rust]() implementations. While these SDKs are not
```

endorsed or maintained by the Apache Flink PMC and currently not part of the current releases, it is great to see these

> new additions that demonstrates extensibility of the framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new additions that demonstrate the extensibility of the framework.
```

For that reason, we've added
a new [page in the documentation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-statefun-docs-release-2.2/sdk/external.html)
to list the 3rd party SDKs that the community is aware of. If you've also worked on a new language SDK for StateFun that

> is stable and am planning to continue maintaining it, please consider letting the community know of your work by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is stable and you're planning to continue maintaining, please consider letting the community know of your work by
```

> is stable and am planning to continue maintaining it, please consider letting the community know of your work by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is stable and you plan to continue maintaining, please consider letting the community know of your work by
```

submitting a pull request to add your project to the list!

## Important Patch Notes

Below is a list of user-facing interface and configuration changes, dependency version upgrades, or removal of supported versions that would be
important to be aware of when upgrading your StateFun applications to this version:

* [[FLINK-18812](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18812)] The Flink version in StateFun 2.2 has been upgraded to 1.11.1.

> * [[FLINK-19203](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19203)] Upgrade Scala version to 2.12, and dropped support for 2.11.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [[FLINK-19203](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19203)] Upgraded Scala version to 2.12, and dropped support for 2.11.
```

> * [[FLINK-19190](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19190)] All existing metric names have been renamed to be camel-cased instead of snake-case, to conform with Flink metric naming conventions. This breaks existing deployments if you depended on previous metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [[FLINK-19190](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19190)] All existing metric names have been renamed to be camel-cased instead of snake-cased, to conform with the Flink metric naming conventions. **This breaks existing deployments if you depended on previous metrics**.
```

> * [[FLINK-19192](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19192)] Connection pool size for remote function HTTP requests have been increased to 1024, with a stale TTL of 1 minute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [[FLINK-19192](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19192)] The connection pool size for remote function HTTP requests has been increased to 1024, with a stale TTL of 1 minute.
```

> * [[FLINK-19191](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19191)] Default max number of asynchronous operations per JVM (StateFun worker) has been decreased to 1024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [[FLINK-19191](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19191)] The default max number of asynchronous operations per JVM (StateFun worker) has been decreased to 1024.
```
